“Sometimes I’ll start a sentence and I don’t even know where it’s going. I just hope I find it along the way.”
“I never thought I’d say this, but I think I ate too much bone marrow.”
“I talk a lot, so I’ve learned to tune myself out.”
“The Dunder Mifflin stock symbol is D.M.I. Do you know what that stands for? Dummies, Morons, and Idiots. Because that’s what you’d have to be to own it. And as one of those idiots, I believe the board owes me answers.” 
“Me think, why waste time say lot word, when few word do trick.” 
“It’s true. Around this office, in the past, I have been a little abrupt with people. But the doctor said, if I can’t find a new way to relate more positively to my surroundings, I’m going to die.”
“A few years ago, my family was on a safari in Africa and my cousin, Mufasa, was um, he was trampled to death by a pack of wildebeests and um, we all took it really hard.”  
“No, I’m not going to tell them about the downsizing. If a patient has cancer, you don’t tell them.” 
“I’m not superstitious, but I am a little stitious.”
"An office is for not dying. An office is a place to live life to the fullest, to the max, to… an office is a place where dreams come true.”
“Would I rather be feared or loved? Easy. Both. I want people to be afraid of how much they love me.” 
“If I don’t have some cake soon, I might die.” 
“Guess what, I have flaws. What are they? Oh, I don’t know. I sing in the shower. Sometimes I spend too much time volunteering. Occasionally I’ll hit somebody with my car. So sue me.” 
“The worst thing about prison was the dementors.”
“Identity theft is not a joke, Jim! Millions of families suffer every year.” 
“Do I need to be liked? Absolutely not. I like to be liked. I enjoy being liked. I have to be liked, but it’s not like this compulsive need to be liked, like my need to be praised.” 
“Life is short. Drive fast and leave a sexy corpse. That’s one of my mottos.” 
“Power points are the peacocks of the business world; all show, no meat.” 
“No, Rose, they are not breathing. And they have no arms or legs… Where are they? You know what? If we come across somebody with no arms or legs, do we bother resuscitating them? I mean, what quality of life do we have there?”
“Fool me once, strike one. Fool me twice, strike three.” 
“I have been trying to get on jury duty every year since I was 18 years old. To get to go sit it in an air-conditioned room, downtown, judging people, while my lunch is paid for… that is the life.”
“I guess I’ve been working so hard, I forgot what it’s like to be hardly working.”
“The only problem is whenever I try to make a taco, I get too excited and crush it.”